In delivering my son from me,
I bury a second husband.
And I in going, madam,
weep o'er my father's death anew:
but I must attend his majesty's command,
to whom I am now in ward,
evermore in subjection.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam;
you,sir, a father
What hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
He hath abandoned his physicians, madam;
under whose practises
he hath persecuted time with hope,
and finds no other advantage in the process
but only the losing of hope by time.
This young gentlewoman had a father,
O, that 'had'! how sad a passage 'tis!
whose skill was almost as great as his honesty;
had it stretched so far,
would have made nature immortal,
and death should have play for lack of work.
Would, for the king's sake, he were living!
I think it would be the death
of the king's disease.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
He was famous, sir, in his profession,
and it was his great right to be so:
Gerard de Narbon.
He was excellent indeed, madam:
the king very lately spoke of him
admiringly and mourningly
he was likely to have lived still,
if knowledge could be set up against mortality.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
A fistula, my lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious.
Was this gentlewoman
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
His sole child, my lord,
and bequeathed to my overlooking.
I have those hopes of her good
that her education promises;
her dispositions she inherits,
in her they are the better
for their simpleness;
she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness.
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
'Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise in.
The remembrance of her father
never approaches her heart
but the tyranny of her sorrows
takes all livelihood from her cheek.
Go to, Helena, no more; go to
lest it be rather thought
you affect a sorrow than have it.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
How understand we that?
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessive grief the enemy to the living.
If the living be enemy to the grief,
the excess makes it soon mortal.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape!
thy blood and virtue contend for empire in thee,
and thy goodness share with thy birthright!
Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy life's key: be cheque'd for silence,
But never tax'd for speech.
What heaven more will,
that thee may furnish and my prayers fall down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell,
'Tis an unseason'd courtier;
good my lord, Advise him.
He cannot want the best
that shall attend his love.
Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.
The best wishes that can be forged
in your thoughts be servants to you!
Be comfortable to my mother, your mistress,
and make much of her.
Farewell, pretty lady:
you must hold the credit of your father.
O, were that all! I think not on my father;
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him.
What was he like?
I have forgot him:
my imagination carries no favour in't but Bertram's.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away.
'Twere all one that I should love
a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love.
♪ music ♪
'Twas pretty, though plague,
to see him every hour;
to sit and draw his arched brows,
his hawking eye, his curls,
In our heart's table;
heart too capable of every line and trick
of his sweet favour:
But now he's gone,
and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his reliques.
Who comes here?
One that goes with him:
I love him for his sake;
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place,
when virtue's steely bones look bleak i' the cold wind:
withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Save you, fair queen!
Are you meditating on virginity?
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you:
let me ask you a question.
Man is enemy to virginity;
how may we barricado it against him?
Keep him out.
But he assails;
and our virginity, though valiant,
in the defence yet is weak:
unfold to us some warlike resistance.
There is none: man, sitting down before you,
will undermine you and blow you up.
Bless our poor virginity
from underminers and blowers up!
It is not politic in the commonwealth of nature
to preserve virginity.
Loss of virginity is rational increase
and there was never virgin got
till virginity was first lost.
I will stand for 't a little,
though therefore I die a virgin.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle,
made of self-love,
which is the most inhibited sin in the canon.
Keep it not; you cannot choose but loose by't:
out with 't!
within the year it will make itself two,
which is a goodly increase;
and the principal itself not much the worse:
away with 't!
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Let me see: marry, ill,
to like him that ne'er it likes.
'Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with lying;
the longer kept, the less worth:
Virginity, like an old courtier,
wears her cap out of fashion:
richly suited, but unsuitable:
just like the brooch and the tooth-pick,
which wear not now.
Your date is better in your pie
and your porridge than in your cheek;
and your virginity, your old virginity,
is like one of our French withered pears,
it looks ill, it eats drily;
marry, 'tis a withered pear;
it was formerly better;
marry, yet 'tis a withered pear:
will you anything with it?
Not my virginity yet
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother and a mistress and a friend,
A phoenix, captain and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster;
with a world of pretty,
fond, adoptious christendoms,
that blinking Cupid gossips.
Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The court's a learning place, and he is one--
What one, i' faith?
That I wish well. 'Tis pity--
What's pity?
That wishing well had not a body in't,
Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think,
which never returns us thanks.
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee,
I will think of thee at court.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
Under Mars, I.
I especially think, under Mars.
Why under Mars?
The wars have so kept you under
that you must needs be born under Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
Why think you so?
You go so much backward when you fight.
That's for advantage.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety;
but the composition
that your valour and fear makes in you
is a virtue of a good wing,
and I like the wear well.
I am so full of businesses,
I cannot answer thee acutely.
When thou hast leisure, say thy prayers;
when thou hast none, remember thy friends;
get thee a good husband,
and use him as he uses thee; so, farewell.
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven:
the fated sky gives us free scope,
only doth backward pull our slow designs
when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
that weigh their pains in sense
and do suppose What hath been cannot be:
who ever strove to show her merit,
that did miss her love?
The king's disease--
my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fix'd and will not leave me.
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears;
Have fought with equal fortune and continue
A braving war.
So 'tis reported, sir.
Nay, 'tis most credible;
we here received it. A certainty,
vouch'd from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business
and would seem to have us make denial.
His love and wisdom, approved so to your majesty,
may plead for amplest credence.
He hath arm'd our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean
to see the Tuscan service,
freely have they leave to stand on either part.
It well may serve A nursery to our gentry,
who are sick for breathing and exploit.
What's he comes here?
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.
Youth, thou bear'st thy father's face;
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee.
Thy father's moral parts mayst thou inherit too!
Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your majesty's.
It much repairs me to talk of your good father.
In his youth he had the wit
which I can well observe today
in our young lords;
but they may jest till their own scorn
return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour;
who were below him he used as creatures of another place
And bow'd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud by his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled.
Such a man might be a copy to these younger times;
Which, follow'd well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
as in your royal speech.
'Let me not live,' quoth he,
'After my flame lacks oil,
to be the snuff of younger spirits,
whose apprehensive senses all but new things disdain;
whose judgments are mere fathers of their garments;
whose constancies expire before their fashions.'
This he wish'd;
I after him do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
To give some labourers room.
You are loved, sir:
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I know't. How long is't, count,
Since the physician at your father's died?
He was much famed.
Some six months since, my lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm; the rest have worn me out
With several applications;
nature and sickness debate it at their leisure.
Welcome, count; my sons are no dearer.
Thank your majesty.
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah
the complaints I have heard of you
I do not all believe:
'tis my slowness that I do not;
for I know you lack not folly to commit them,
and have ability enough to make such knaveries yours.
'Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
Well, sir.
No, madam, 'tis not so well that I am poor,
though many of the rich are damned:
but, if I may have your ladyship's good will
to go to the world,
Isbel the woman and I will do as we may.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
I do beg your good will in this case.
In what case?
In Isbel's case and mine own.
Service is no heritage:
and I think I shall never have the blessing of God
till I have issue o' my body;
for they say barnes are blessings.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
My poor body, madam, requires it:
I am driven on by the flesh;
and he must needs go that the devil drives.
Is this all your worship's reason?
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons
such as they are.
May the world know them?
I have been, madam, a wicked creature,
as you and all flesh and blood are;
and, indeed, I do marry that I may repent.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
I am out o' friends, madam;
and I hope to have friends for my wife's sake.
Such friends are thine enemies, sirrah.
Get you gone, sir; I'll talk with you more anon.
May it please you, madam,
that he bid Helen come to you: of her I am to speak.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman
I would speak with her;
Well, now.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me;
and she herself, without other advantage,
may lawfully make title to as much love as she finds:
there is more owing her than is paid;
and more shall be paid her than she'll demand.
Madam, I was very late more near her
than I think she wished me:
alone she was, and did communicate
to herself her own words
to her own ears;
she thought, I dare vow for her,
they touched not any stranger sense.
Her matter was, she loved your son:
Fortune, she said, was no goddess,
that had put such difference
betwixt their two estates;
Love no god, that would not extend his might,
only where qualities were level;
This she delivered in the most bitter touch of sorrow
that e'er I heard virgin exclaim in:
which I held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal;
sithence, in the loss that may happen,
it concerns you something to know it.
You have discharged this honestly;
keep it to yourself:
many likelihoods informed me of this before,
which hung so tottering in the balance
that I could neither believe nor misdoubt.
stall this in your bosom;
and I thank you for your honest care:
I will speak with you more anon.
Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are nature's, these are ours;
this thorn doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
It is the show and seal of nature's truth,
Where love's strong passion is impress'd in youth:
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick on't: I observe her now.
What is your pleasure, madam?
You know, Helen, I am a mother to you.
Mine honourable mistress.
Nay, a mother: Why not a mother?
When I said 'a mother,'
methought you saw a serpent:
what's in 'mother,' that you start at it? I say,
I am your mother;
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine:
'tis often seen adoption strives with nature
and choice breeds a native slip to us from foreign seeds:
You ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan,
Yet I express to you a mother's care:
God's mercy, maiden!
Does it curd thy blood to say I am thy mother?
Why? that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I say, I am your mother.
Pardon, madam;
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honour'd name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble:
My master, my dear lord he is;
and I his servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.
Nor I your mother?
You are my mother, madam; would you were,--
So that my lord your son were not my brother,--
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister.
Can't no other, but, I your daughter,
he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law:
God shield you mean it not!
Daughter and mother so strive upon your pulse.
What, pale again?
My fear hath catch'd your fondness:
now I see the mystery of your loneliness,
and find your salt tears' head:
now to all sense 'tis gross
You love my son; invention is ashamed,
Against the proclamation of thy passion,
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true;
But tell me then, 'tis so;
for, look thy cheeks confess it, th' one to th' other;
and thine eyes see it so grossly shown
in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it:
only sin and hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected.
Speak, is't so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forswear't: howe'er, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
Tell me truly.
Good madam, pardon me!
Do you love my son?
Your pardon, noble mistress!
Love you my son?
Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about;
my love hath in't a bond,
whereof the world takes note:
come, come, disclose the state of your affection;
for your passions have to the full appeach'd.
Then, I confess,
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
I love your son.
My friends were poor, but honest; so's my love:
Be not offended;
for it hurts not him that he is loved of me:
I follow him not by any token
of presumptuous suit;
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error,
I adore the sun,
that looks upon his worshipper,
but knows of him no more.
My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do: but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love:
O, then, give pity to her,
whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!
Had you not lately an intent,--speak truly,--
To go to Paris?
Madam, I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects,
such as his reading and manifest experience
had collected for general sovereignty;
amongst the rest, there is a remedy,
approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings
whereof the king is render'd lost.
This was your motive For Paris, was it? speak.
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris and the medicine and the king
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.
But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
he would receive it?
he and his physicians are of a mind;
he, that they cannot help him,
They, that they cannot help:
how shall they credit a poor unlearned virgin,
when the schools, embowell'd
of their doctrine,
have left off the danger to itself?
There's something in't,
more than my father's skill,
which was the greatest of his profession,
that his good receipt
shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven:
and, would your honour but give me leave
to try success,
I'ld venture the well-lost life
of mine on his grace's cure
By such a day and hour.
Dost thou believe't?
Ay, madam, knowingly.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants
and my loving greetings to those of mine in court:
I'll stay at home and pray God's blessing
into thy attempt:
Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.